- ...many people who had heard the call of the desert but were forced to come to terms with the tyranny of the town.
- The desert is a good teacher. It is a place where we do not die of thirst. It is a place where we rediscover the roots of our existence. Once we grasp this lesson, we realise that the physical desert is not necessary to lead the life of a hermit. [...] You can find your desert in a corner of your house, on a motor way, in a square, in a crowded street. But you must first renounce the slavery of illusions, refuse the blackmail of pressure, resist the glitter of appearances, repudate the domination of activity, reject the dictatorship of hypocrisy. Then the desert becomes a place where you do not go out to see the sand blowing in the wind but the Spirit waiting to make his dwelling within you.
- The desert is the land of malediction and the land of benediction.
- In the desert nature manifests itself in its extremes: prodigal fertility and cruel barrenness.
- The desert can be tomb and cradle, wasteland and garden, death and resurrection, hell and heaven./This explains why in Arabic there are some four hundred words that express either contradictory or ambivalent meanings.[...]/Thus in the desert you will find that God is simultaneously present and absent, proximate and remote, visible and invisible, manifest and hidden. He can receive you with great tenderness and then abandon you on the cross of loneliness. He consoles you and torments you at the same time. He heals you only to wound you again. He may speak to you today and ignore you tomorrow.
- ...the desert does not delude. And least of all does the desrt delude those who accept it in its two-sided reality of life and death, presence and absence. Nor will they be deceived by God who calls them to the desert. God never abandons us.
- The desert is the threshold to the meeting ground of God and man. It is the scene of the exodus. You do not settle there, you pass through.
- At the threshold of the desert the first word they said to me was: _Wait_.
- The first step in asceticism the desert will teach you is purification from haste, agitation, impatience, pressure. In the desert you have to get rid of the 'master of the situation' complex. You find that you are little, insignificant, squeezed in on a waiting bench.
- If, on the other hand, you succeed in entering this new dimension of time, you will experience an unexpected calm, a hitherto unknown sense of freedom, and a surprising capacity for wonder.
- It seemed that the _prayer of powerlessness_ was preparing me for the weakest moment when, deprived of everything, I would be open to invasion by some unknown force. Empty the self in the act of waiting. Dismantle the defenses. Call off the sentries, Raze down the observation towers.
- Realize that the most extraordinary thing you can do is to pass the time which never passes. Hope can make time pass. Hope is indeed the true dimension of time.
- To start with, therefore, prayer is confusion, shock, abandonment. You have lost your familiar points of reference. [...] The guide maps offered bythe most accredited spiritual master prove useless./Prayer invalidates all your previous knowledge, radically questions your experience, and ridicules the books which were indispensable to you.
- No, prayer does not show you the way. Prayer obliges you to invent it.
- Even on the questiohn of prayer it is difficult to resist the urge to dominate others. We do it on hte pretext of teaching others _how_ to pray. We want every one to accept our methods, follow our routes, keep our schedules and ape our attitudes.
- I did not know the law of the desert, which is the law of solidarity. Today you were in need, tomorrow I could be in trouble, and you will lend me a hand. but money is not to be allowed to cheapen these simple relationships between men.
- The true contemplative, according to St John Climacus, lives in a terrestrial heaven; his head is not in the clouds. On the contrary, he forces heaven to come down to our poor earth. For this reason the heart of the contemplative is in the heart of the world./While Eastern mysticism discards the individual, Christian traditions of mysticism and prayer value him highly. It is dialogue and communion between God and man.